# Creator Royalties

NEW DRAFT OF HOW


0/ How Can We Enforce Creator Royalties? 



1/ There was a fruitful debate on the topic of creator royalties in a recent podcast Co-Hosted by @Haseeb (@Choppingblock) and @LauraShin (@Unchained), with guests @ZhouxunYin, CoFounder of @MagicEden, and @Li Jin, CoFounder/GP of @variantfund.

In the clip below, Haseeb explains the difficulties on enforicng royalties without compromising Censorship-Resistance or Turing-Completeness.
(INSERT TRILEMMA CLIP)



2/ As Haseeb hinted, the solution to this problem is trivial if you allow for some surveillance/censorship mechanism. In the case an nft sale is observed to avoid royalty payments, the censoring party would blacklist the item (burn it with priviledged rights, alter metadata to blur image, mutate the contract, etc), effectively solving the problem.

Zhuoxun explains a previous solution that followed this structure, and how the response was (obviously) negative.
(INSERT MUTABLE CLIP)



3/ At Ape16z, we don't believe nonconsensual censorship or mutability is an option. This leaves us at the real question.

Can royalty enforcement avoid a compromise on Censorship-Resistance or Turing-Completeness?

Let's review the two fundamental obstacles that Haseeb mentioned.



4/ Fundamental Problem 1) 

Assuming Turing-Completeness, there is no way of discerning between a sale and a transfer at the contract level.

What does this mean exactly? Imagine your contract has two functions: `transfer(recipient)` and `sale(buyer, saleAmount)`

In this case, marketplaces can simply conduct sales with a call to `transfer()` and escrow the funds externally.

There's two potential solutions to this.


5/ FP1 Solution 1) 

A higher-level wallet-identifying application, similar to that offered by @MatricaLabs, to identify if the transfer parties belong to the same person.

Users would have the option of registering wallets to a single account, between which transfers would avoid any royalty payments (i.e. transfer from burner wallet to ledger)
(INSERT PSEUDOCODE IMAGE)



6/ This solution maintains Web3 alignment, as it's completely optional to the user. 

Additionally, the implementation of the wallet-identifying application could include privacy preserving technology (e.g. ZK-Proofs for wallet <> profile linking), and the application itself could be managed by a community multisig/governance mechanism, rather than a centralized authority.



7/ There are concerns that arise wrt malicously gaming this mechanism, depending on its implementation.

For example, if wallets can be un-registered, then temporarily register your wallet to the selling party's profile to avoid royalties.
Even if wallets cannot be un-registered, a service can create a "Trading DAO" profile where all linked wallets can trade with one another royalty-free.



8/ We understand this solution is not perfect (nothing is), but we do believe there's room to explore this mechanism, especially for certain collections/use-cases in particular.

Now for our second solution. 

FP1 Solution 2) If we can't discern between a `transfer()` and a `sale()`, then let's just treat ALL transfers as sales.



9/ This does come with the small downside that an intra-person transfer (i.e. burner to ledger) is obligated to pay royalties.

But this is an extremely reasonable mechanism with NFTs - unlike fungible tokens, wherein a mandatory tax on ALL transfers (exchanges/market makers having to pay tax on intra-book rebalances, etc.), would break everything.

So we solved it! Right? No, not yet.



10/ Fundamental Problem 2)

In the event of a sale, how does the contract determine the *true* value of the sale?

Now imagine the contract's only function was `sale(buyer, saleAmount)`. Marketplaces can still avoid royalties - simply call the sale function with amount == 0.01 SOL, and escrow the rest of the funds externally.

We again propose two solutions to this problem.



11/ FP2 Solution 1) Fixed Royalties

This is a trivial solution. Rather than charging x% of saleAmount, charge a fixed 1 SOL fee. Or offer an option between an arbitrary amount of (amount, token) pairs, effectively the minimum.

The tradeoff here is that creator royalties scale with volume (# of transfers), not value. For some collections/use-cases this may be perfectly fine. For those in which it's not, however, we have our second solution.



12/ FP2 Solution 2) Oracle-Price-Based Royalties.

This would allow the creator to charge x% royalties (as is the standard), but the `saleAmount` is derived from a trustless appraisal mechanism, rather than a single party (marketplace or seller).

The technical details behind this solution are more complex. For example, Floor Price items are relatively easier to identify "fair value", where as rare items are more complex.

There are entire protocols (on Solana and Ethereum) founded with the sole purpose of solving this problem, such as @abacus.



13/ Ape16z believes that these flows are the best path forward to solving a complex issue, not only for Solana, but for crypto-based creator economies as a whole.

We call on developers, marketplaces, oracles, and community members to chime in, and help us collectively implement the optimal solution(s).

Now that we've shared our proposal for the path forward ("Can we enforce"), in the next 24 hours we will share our opinion on creator royalties ("Should we enforce").



